How to win an AI Hackathon, without using AI
hackathons, without using AI
hacking.
I will explain the basics of
data, spatial data.
Northumbrian water has two
sites in the UK, one by the
border in Northumbria in
England and down in the south.
We have spatial data on that.
We had time series.
We had data on 15-minute
intervals, we had data on
that.
We had leakage estimates, so
how much water was actually
lost due to leakage.
We had flow rates.
So in the UK, you can imagine
how the water sort of
authority, the water companies
have evolved over the last few
decades.
And we have something called a
DMA.
It's a collection of zones of
postcodes, some are quite big,
some are quite small, and the
flow rate is just how much water
is passing through, how much
water is being used by people.
We have the reported leaks,
it's basically an Excel spreadsheet
with some dates, times, postcodes
and sort of what the person said
over the phone.
We have pipe size, so that was
measurements in metric, so
centimetres, millimetres.
Imperial UK, Imperial US,
Imperial Roman, you name it, we
have pipe location.
That was more
an indication rather than an exact
measurement. Again,
pipes have been laid over the UK for
decades, so
they knew there was a pipe on this road
somewhere on this road and
they just hoped for the best.
We've got pipe type, so you've
got plastic, you've got metal.
Turns out there's also asbestos,
which, to be honest, worried me
somewhat, but asbestos, we were told,
was fine as long as no one drills
into it, so we're all safe.
We've got social data,
that's basically saying
who's living in the area,
is it students, is it families, is it business,
what sort of mixture. We've got weather,
rain, sun,
not so often,
but how much rain we've got,
how much business, what sort of
businesses are nearby, what their usage
and then we've got stuff.
What I'm guessing is someone had
a week to put this data together.
The first four days, they got all
the stuff on the right, and then
they spent the last day just putting in
other stuff, and I can't remember what the other stuff
was, but it's just general stuff, so
it might be interesting. So this is what we
had.
And the problem set up that
we were given is
a very standard,
I would say, machine learning
framework. So we've
got all this data, all
the data that you would think would give
you an insight to leakage.
And we've
got all the previous results, so we've got
leakage from the past of
two, three, five years.
We've got
covariates or predictors that we
think would be useful, so
weather, businesses,
pipe type, pipe size.
Intuitively, you'd think
if the pipe was older, then it might break.
if a pipe is made of lead,
then that's more likely to have a leak than a pipe
made of plastic.
And so we're led up to
this very classic machine learning
problem of
lots of data, now put it into
your computer, turn the handle, and
try and predict what's going to happen.
And in my head, I had this
amazing algorithm
that would tell someone
the precise coordinates of where the next leak
was going to happen, and engineers would
rush out and fix the leak before anything
would happen. That's why I thought it would happen.
So this is me,
approximately like this, and
I worked hard all
day. So this was a Wednesday,
and I started coding
about quarter past nine on a Wednesday.
So I just got the data, and I opened up
the folder, and I
looked at it, and I automatically went
to work. So I was a
dplyr machine. Hardly would have been proud
that this was
amazing. It
turns out that there's
multiple ways of spelling DMA.
You'd think there's only one way of spelling DMA,
but they spell DMA multiple times,
so there's lots of left joins, right joins,
every join you can imagine.
I even did some AI
or regression, as I
like to call it. So I did some regression,
I even did some
boosty, baggy tree things
to try and predict what was happening.
I was working hard all day.
I was doing what I was told.
This is Seb,
an exact likeness,
and Seb had a different strategy. So we were on the same
team. So Seb is also in the booth
at Jumping Rivers at San Francisco,
so please go and embarrass him about this.
So Seb spent all day drinking
coffee.
And Seb ate Hobnobs as well.
So if you don't know what a Hobnob is, it's a top
class biscuit made in the UK.
And Seb asked questions.
So in this room there were 10 teams,
and then there were a bunch of tables where people
from Northumbrian Water were there
ready to answer questions.
And there were some people who were engineers,
there were some people who were sort of in charge
of the analytics, some people who were in charge of
customer service, just, you know,
people in tables who were waiting
for questions. So Seb would walk around
drinking his coffee, eating his Hobnobs
and having a nice jolly old time
while I was working hard.
And I was
I have to be honest, okay?
So I was doing
all the work,
and I wanted to eat Hobnobs, and I wasn't
getting very many Hobnobs.
I was drinking lots of coffee,
and if I'm being truthful,
I sort of started Jumping Rivers to avoid
doing work, you know, that's what all
founding a company is, it's about skiving from work.
And, well, I seemed to
be doing lots of work, and Seb seemed to be wandering
around doing no work whatsoever.
So,
do you remember back at the start,
the goal of the
hackathon was to reduce leaks by
20%.
And that's sort of an obvious thing,
you know, who wouldn't want to reduce
leaks by 20%?
But a more obvious question,
or a less obvious question is, why,
you know, why 20%?
You know, why reduce leaks?
You know, is it a big problem?
And, after
chatting with a few people,
Seb found out, and essentially
they get charged a lot.
Okay?
So, they're wanting to reduce leaks
because they're going to be charged an awful
lot of money. And
next year they're going to be charged even more
money, and the year after that they're going to be charged
even more money again.
So each year they're going to get charged more and more money
for having leakage.
So, the goal
wasn't to reduce leaks by 20%,
the goal
was really to reduce the amount lost due
to leakage. And
they're both similar ideas,
but if at the end
of the year you had 10,000 leaks
but lost very little water,
then that solves the second one
but not the first one. And that's
what they're wanting, they're wanting to reduce the amount
lost due to leakage. They didn't really care
about leaks, it was just the overall amount.
So that's the first
thing.
Second one is, how do you
estimate leakage?
Now, in the UK, you pick up a newspaper
and you read something
like the amount lost due to leakage
was 5,323 litres
and 3 teaspoons.
And you think,
Dave got that measured, that's accurate.
Lots of decimal places,
you know exactly what's going on.
This isn't made up.
Well, what happens
in practice is you have a DMA,
so a DMA is just a collection of zones,
so postcodes. Again, some are quite
big. And the
thought process goes, well,
we know how much water is going
into the DMA, we know how much water is going
out, that's how much water is being used.
And, well, no one would use
water at 3 o'clock in the morning.
So any water being used
at 3 o'clock in the morning must be a leak.
Which
isn't the most precise
of measurements when you think about it
over the course of two seconds.
And Northumbrian Water know this.
They know this.
It's not a surprise, they know this measurement is
shall we say noisy
or imprecise.
There's nothing they can do about it.
And we're currently working with another company
to actually measure soil temperature
and do a bit of prediction.
But what we have on that day is
that's the column
that says leakage.
It's the minimum flow rate at 3 o'clock in the morning.
Would you believe that on New Year's Day
the leakage goes
through the roof and turns people up at 3 o'clock
in the morning? So that's what they have.
What do you
need to fix leaks?
Well, you need an engineer
and you need data.
So the engineer is obvious.
You need someone to go out there,
probably in a van, with some tools to fix
a leak.
What data do we need?
Well,
when an engineer goes out,
there's a leak at this region.
Well, they want to know
what's the flow rate, how much water is being
used? What's the pipe type?
Is it steel? Is it plastic?
Is it asbestos?
What's the historical
leakage? Was there someone in the team
that went there last week and perhaps
it's the same thing again?
What's the weather?
Is it sunny? Is it raining?
They need to be able to predict this
and it could cause problems. Traffic?
Allegedly, they're not allowed to just
dig up roads when they feel like it.
So if it's a main road,
they have to schedule that
at night time. Crime?
Do they need to bring a friend
to watch the van when they're going looking for leaks?
And this takes them two hours per
day to get this information.
So every single day, an engineer walks in
and they say there's a leak
at this area and they spend two hours
getting all this information.
All this information that we've just
been given for the hack.
There's 35 engineers.
Engineers aren't
cheap and
currently have, every morning,
two hours that five engineers spend
trying to get all this data together.
So our solution
is not to try and predict leaks.
When I say our, this was Seb's solution to be perfectly honest
but I'll go for our now.
Our solution is not to try and predict
where leaks are going to happen, but to reduce
engineering time.
We can get that two hours down
to about 10 or 15 minutes.
It's just giving them
the data that they need.
And this is relatively easy
and it's definitely doable.
There's not a sort of R squared
or predictive value or anything like that.
It's just about, they have data
in one place, we're wanting to make it
accessible in another. So this we can
definitely do.
Now, we're now in day two
of the hack.
And on the second half of the day
we have to do a presentation of what we've built.
So we've got half a day
to do an app, and there's myself and Seb.
So what we need to do is we need to
decide what we're going to make
and decide what to
bluff, or lie,
or pretend, or whatever you want to call it.
So for example,
if we can demo a single DMA,
we don't
need to show two, three, four, five.
We can do one, we don't need to do more.
If we can display pipe location,
we don't need to
tell them about pipe type, that's obvious.
We must be able to do it.
So we've decided what to make and what to bluff.
So this is a screenshot
of the winning app.
This first screenshot contains lots of bluffing.
So for example, in the top left-hand
corner, there's a little person that
indicates we've got authentication.
We can do authentication, we do authentication
for our customers. We did not do authentication
on that half a day.
We've got some high-priority DMAs
all bluffed.
We can do that. We didn't need to do that in a day.
Here
we've got a screenshot of
what an engineer could possibly see.
So this was a long
column of different graphs
and different data. The first couple
of graphs were nice and busy and interactive.
The last
few graphs were a bit more static in nature.
And if you look at that little
blue slider,
when that was clicked on,
the graph was going grey, and that
was indicating that it wasn't going to be part
of an overall report the engineer
would take with them.
Also an idea about taking a picture
and then being able to upload it onto the app.
Again, we didn't
do this. It was just an indication.
And this was all done using
lots of dplyr, ggplot,
Shiny app,
and all done in half a day.
So the app
has now been used in production. I'm the
second person on the right, the tall
baldy chap. And I would love
to show you screenshots, but
because it's got national
infrastructure data, it's got
locations of pipes, we can't just
show screenshots easily.
So that was when we won it two years ago.
We also won it this year as well.
So sorry for bragging,
but we won this year's hackathon as well.
And we also won that one as well.
So I'm not really sorry at all about bragging.
I'm now just bragging completely.
So,
summary.
It's obvious, but think
about your problem. And if someone
told me before the hack, I would say, of course
you'll think about your problem.
But I really didn't. I jumped in with both feet.
I'm good at dplyr,
I'm good at R, I'm good at
building models, and I went straight
for that.
And that's not the best way.
Talk to people, ask them
what the problem really is.
Also, don't send me to
a hackathon without others. So the one
hackathon that we've lost is the only one
that I've been to by myself.
So that's somewhat embarrassing.
So I'm now in this strange situation
where if the team go on a hack, I'm not sure
if I want them to win or lose, because, yeah.
Anyway,
so thank you very much for listening.
Sorry I couldn't join you
in San Francisco.
It's really painful watching Twitter
and just seeing all this. Isn't our
conference absolutely wonderful?
So it's painful over in Newcastle.
And by all means, please
come over and say hi, not to me,
but to Seb and the others
at the stall, and thank you very much
for listening. Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Colin. That was great.
Do you have any advice on where to find some
hackathons in North America?
Not so many.
Not so much.
Typically,
one should know
would be my answer. I think
you've caught me with that question.
I suspect user groups
would know, so if you're part of an R user
group or a data science user group,
typically any hackathons would approach
the user group first of all for a bit of advertising.
So that's
where I think you'd find. And once you
sort of stumble into that field,
you then find them everywhere.
Awesome. Well, thank you so
much for joining us from the UK.
We really appreciate it. So this
concludes this track.
I believe lunch is going to be served somewhere
out there around
1pm. So thank you so much.